*The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi*

The Windup Girl is a work of biopunk science fiction set in 23rd century Bangkok. The Earth’s reserves of petroleum have been completely depleted, with a new economy of calories to replace it. American biotech corporations AgriGen, PurCal, and Total Nutrient Holdings have monopolies over the global food supply after most animal and plant species are eradicated by bio-engineered viruses like cibiscosis, blister rust, and fa’gan. Thailand is the only country of its Southeast Asian neighbours able to feed itself without genetically modified (GMO) foods like U-Tex rice or SoyPRO. 

Most of the world has regressed to pre-industrial standards of living, having fallen like dominoes to the Midwestern calorie companies. Yet the Thai Kingdom is clever where others are not; “potatoes and tomatoes and chiles fill the market, piled in such splendid abundance, an array of fecund nightshades that no one has seen in centuries”. This is nothing short of a miracle; what the Thai have accomplished is a resurrection. The calorie companies may have yoked the world to their patented, sterile grains and seeds, but they are running out of genetic material. Anderson Lake is a a farang (white devil), an AgriGen executive in Bangkok negotiating the corporation’s backing of a military coup in exchange for access to the nation’s highly elusive and sought after seedbank.  

The Windup Girl reads as a parable about corporate overreach, the endurance of class oppression, and climate change. The internal conflict between the Ministry of the Environment, looking inwards for protection against rising sea levels and failing flood infrastructure, and the Ministry of Trade, wanting to bring back free trade, is a lesson in human shortsightedness. The parallels between Bacigalupi’s world and our own are interesting without ever becoming didactic. It’s a historical fact that Thailand is the only Southeast Asian country to have resisted European colonisation, and it’s likely not a coincidence that the legacy of the calorie companies resembles the magnitude of human suffering and environmental degradation caused by Western imperialism. Though it was written 10 years ago, Bacigalupi’s portrayal of religious fundamentalism and anti-Chinese sentiment in Asia has also only become more, not less persuasive. 

It’s likewise not difficult to imagine how food companies came to be in the business of breaking nations: recall the century of the banana companies and their exploitation of Latin American countries, as chillingly told in Gabriel García Márquez’s One Hundred Years of Solitude. Recall companies like Monsanto, the world’s largest producer of GMO seeds. Similar to AgriGen’s strategy, Monsanto developed GMO seeds that would resist its own branded herbicide, Roundup, offering farmers a convenient way to spray fields with weed killer without affecting crops. Monsanto then patented the seeds, assuring only its own hand would possess the means of argricultural production. 

As effective as the political messaging in The Windup Girl is its evocative and critical depiction of a 22nd-century subaltern urbanism. The urban form is recognizably Bangkok. Characters move through the city’s historical khlongs (canals) and parallel roads, resulting in the city’s linear urbanism. Soi (alleys) connect land paths to ancient water-based temples and villages. Forces, supernatural, aspirational, and economical, pull various characters through the city towards intimacies they cherish, and those they don’t. At times, Bacigalupi’s vision feels remarkably coherent with that of urban theorists. The novel is brim with insurgent planners and entrepreneurial spirits who transgress and repurpose infrastructures in unexpected ways. It is the liveliness and messiness of this urban sociality, taking place against landscapes typically pornified as ruined or decaying—as the City of Divine Beings is about to drown—that earns Bacigalupi a place among great world builders like Octavia Butler and William Gisbon. While the ambivalence of an ‘urban jungle’ like Bangkok seems a logical setting for this world, the juxtaposition of the city as pestilent and paradise—the Thai seedbank is an Eden of lost calories—is an overdone trope that I’m not sure Bacigalupi is even aware of reproducing.

Still, with the flair of dystopian cityscapes like Bladerunner’s Los Angeles, the sprawling, disorganized metropolis of Bangkok remains compelling. The Windup Girl, like great works of cyberpunk before it, combines low and high tech in discerning ways. It can be inferred that the ozone layer has been irredeemably thinned out, as all fossil fuels are nonexistent save for use by the uber-rich and the military. The energy that makes the city go comes from neither petroleum nor renewable sources like wind, solar, or biomass. Energy—or in this world—calories, derives from refugee labour, enslaved androids, and genetically modified animals. Despite many technological advancements, all life still makes waste.

The best science-fiction holds up a mirror to the times in which they are made. The Windup Girl reflects deep, troubling ideas about technology, humanity, and nature chimed with postmodern and cyperpunk theory. It is a city held together by fear of social relations in the age of bio-terrorism, not just because of contagion, but because the convergence of extreme poverty, starvation, corruption, and a population crisis marks the beginning of the end of trust. High-rise favelas are lit by illegal blue methane, streets crammed with Thais, Malay-Chinese yellow card refugees, monks, farang, and New People. People may be living in even closer quarters as the number of livable places on a warming planet are dwindling, but the spectre of lonely, atomised urban life is familiar. The dregs of humanity remain the same. 
